---
layout: default
title: Research
---

I am a syntactician interested in cross-clausal dependencies. The received wisdom is that finite and nonfinite embedded clauses have opposite behavior regarding their ability to license their subject. This difference is commonly stated in terms of phases: finite clauses are phases and, as such, not only do they have its own subject licensing resources, but they are also impervious to some phase-external operations. Nonfinite clauses, on the other hand, lack such resources and have to depend on clause-external operations in order to license their subject. I am captivated by data that challenge such generalizations. I have worked on both nonfinite clauses where a subject can be licensed with their own internal resources and finite clauses that are not impervious to phase-external operations. More recently, the cross-clausal dependency I have been focusing on is control, especially in Wolof.

## Control in Wolof ([PLC 2022 handout](https://sznfng.github.io/Control_in_Wolof_PLC2022.pdf))

In Wolof, subject and object control clauses differ in whether or not the embedded controlled subject is pronounced. In subject control, the embedded subject is obligatorily null, while in object control, the embedded subject is obligatorily an overt pronoun. That object control-looking sentences in Wolof are indeed cases of control can be argued on the basis of the signature properties that characterize this type of construction (i.e. obligatory bound reading, de se interpretation, and sloppy reading under ellipsis). The questions we may ask are then: why do subject and object control in Wolof differ in the phonological realization of controlled PRO? Which control theory is compatible with such realization?

Answers to the first question may be provided by further differences between subject and object control. Specifically, the absence of a pronounced subject in subject control correlates with the obligatoriness of clitic climbing and the prohibition of WH-resumption (i.e. the occurrence of a clitic in the position where a WH-phrase moves from in the embedded clause). Conversely, the obligatoriness of a pronounced subject in object control correlates with the prohibition of clitic climbing and the obligatoriness of WH-resumption.

Based on these properties, I suggest that object control clauses project a ΣP which "impedes" movement. Assuming that obligatory control is derived by movement, I model the pronounced PRO in object control as the partial residue of movement that has been impeded . Likewise, WH-resumption is modeled in the same way (i.e. as a residue of impeded movement), which accounts for why these properties dovetail in Wolof object control. Subject control, on the other hand, would be an instance of restructuring. This captures why subject control has the opposite properties as those showcased by object control.

This nascent project bears on the different control theories that account for the phonological properties of PRO. Furthermore, it is informative of the nature and barrierhood of nonfinite clauses.

## Bare nominals in Wolof ([PhD dissertation](https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/139864))

The semantic interpretation and syntactic distribution of BNs in Wolof differ from what is taken to characterize their counterparts in other languages. First, instead of being number neutral (i.e. compatible with either a singular or plural interpretation), BNs in Wolof are singular when unmodified. They can only receive a plural interpretation when the BN is accompanied by nominal morphology that can expone a plural feature. Importantly, if such morphological is number-invariant, the BN retains a singular interpretation. In order to account for these facts, I propose that Wolof instantiates a system of nominal licensing whereby interpretable features also require licensing. If correct, this analysis provides a window into the role that features play as driving forces of syntactic derivation. ([paper on LingBuzz](https://ling.auf.net/lingbuzz/004922))

BNs in Wolof have the syntactic distribution of pseudo noun incorporation. Alternatively said, these nominals have to be linearly adjacent to the verb. However, there are two seemingly unrelated circumstances under which these nominals can sidestep this adjacency requirement: they can be A-bar moved or there can be an additional argument inserted between the BN object and the subject of the sentence. Assuming dependent case, I propose that this set of circumstances is not accidental: BNs in Wolof do not have to be adjacent to the verb when a case competitor is provided to them -- otherwise, they have to be licensed via linear adjacency with the verb. What A-bar movement and the introduction of an intermediate argument have in common is that they provide a case competitor to the BN. This research thus contributes to the long standing debate about the relationship between nominal licensing and case assignment. ([paper on LingBuzz](https://ling.auf.net/lingbuzz/005314))

## Hyperraising ([Glossa paper](https://doi.org/10.5334/gjgl.667))

In Mongolian and quite a few other languages, the subject of an embedded finite clause can receive case from a matrix assigner. They can also move into the matrix clause, i.e. they can hyperraise into it. Both of these operations challenge common assumptions about Phasehood (as well as other assumptions about Activity and case assignment. I propose that this phenomenon in Mongolian requires the movement of the embedded finite subject through Spec-CP. Being at the edge of a phase, it can be visible to a matrix case assigner, as well as to a movement trigger. What is striking about Mongolian hyperraising it can be demonstrated to be an instance of A-movement. This conclusion in turn poses a challenge to conventional assumptions about the A/A-bar distinctions, according to which a syntactic position like Spec-CP is inherently an A-bar position.

## Gerund clauses in Brazilian Portuguese ([M.A. thesis](https://ling.auf.net/lingbuzz/002715))

My M.A. thesis is a study of different types of gerund clauses in Brazilian Portuguese. I propose that their different properties can be captured if they have different sizes. I show that this proposal can also account for gerund clauses in adjunct position.

(Other minor research projects I have worked on can be found under "Presentations" on my [CV](https://sznfng.github.io/CV_sfong.pdf).)
